docs/08.md, before:

# Day 8 - The infamous "grep" and other text processors

* [Lesson video](https://youtu.be/kG5JGJN5iTc)

## INTRO

Your server is now running two services: the *sshd* (Secure Shell Daemon) service that you use to login; and the Apache2 web server. Both of these services are generating logs as you and others access your server - and these are text files which we can analyse using some simple tools.

Plain text files are a key part of "the Unix way" and there are many small "tools" to allow you to easily edit, sort, search and otherwise manipulate them. Today we’ll use `grep`, `cat`, `more`, `less`, `cut`, `awk` and `tail` to slice and dice your logs.

The `grep` command is famous for being extremely powerful and handy, but also because its "nerdy" name is typical of Unix/Linux conventions.

## YOUR TASKS TODAY

* Dump out the complete contents of a file with `cat` like this: `cat /var/log/apache2/access.log`
* Use `less` to open the same file, like this: `less /var/log/apache2/access.log` - and move up and down through the file with your arrow keys, then use “q” to quit.
* Again using `less`, look at a file, but practice confidently moving around using  *gg*, *GG* and */*,  *n* and *N* (to go to the top of the file, bottom of the file, to search for something and to hop to the next "hit" or back to the previous one)
* View recent logins and `sudo` usage by viewing `/var/log/auth.log` with `less`
* Look at just the tail end of the file with `tail /var/log/apache2/access.log` (yes, there's also a `head` command!)
* Follow a log in real-time with: `tail -f /var/log/apache2/access.log`  (while accessing your server’s web page in a browser)
* You can take the output of one command and "pipe" it in as the input to another by using the `|` (pipe) symbol
* So, dump out a file with `cat`, but pipe that output to `grep` with a search term - like this: `cat /var/log/auth.log  | grep "authenticating"`
* Simplify this to: `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log`
* Piping allows you to narrow your search, e.g.  `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log | grep "root"`
* Use the `cut` command to select out most interesting portions of each line by specifying "-d" (delimiter) and "-f" (field) - like: `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log| grep "root"| cut -f 10- -d" "`   (field 10 onwards, where the delimiter between field is the " " character). This approach can be very useful in extracting useful information from log data.
* Use the `-v` option to invert the selection and find attempts to login with other users: `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log| grep -v "root"| cut -f 10- -d" "`

The output of any command can be "redirected" to a file with the ">" operator. The command: `ls -ltr > listing.txt` wouldn't list the directory contents to your screen, but instead redirect into the file "listing.txt" (creating that file if it didn't exist, or overwriting the contents if it did).

## POSTING YOUR PROGRESS

Re-run the command to list all the IP's that have unsuccessfully tried to login to your server as *root* - but this time, use the the ">" operator to redirect it to the file: `~/attackers.txt`. You might like to share and compare with others doing the course how heavily you're "under attack"!

## EXTENSION

* See if you can extend your filtering of `auth.log` to select just the IP addresses, then pipe this to  `sort`, and then further to `uniq` to get a list of all those IP addresses that have been "auditing" your server security for you.
* Investigate the `awk` and `sed` commands. When you're having difficulty figuring out how to do something with `grep` and `cut`, then you may need to step up to using these. Googling for "linux sed tricks" or "awk one liners" will get you many examples.
* Aim to learn at least one simple useful trick with both `awk` and `sed`

## RESOURCES

* [Text processing commands](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nLa6jAbULe8&t=97s)
* [OSTechNix grep tutorial](https://www.ostechnix.com/the-grep-command-tutorial-with-examples-for-beginners/)
* [Where GREP came from](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NTfOnGZUZDk)
* [SED onliners](https://edoras.sdsu.edu/doc/sed-oneliners.html)
* [RegExr - a tool to learn, build and test Regular Expressions](https://regexr.com/)
* [explainshell.com - write down a command-line to see the help text that matches each argument](https://explainshell.com/)

## TROUBLESHOOT AND MAKE A SAD SERVER HAPPY!

Practice what you've learned with some challenges at [SadServers.com](https://sadservers.com/):

* ["Saskatoon": counting IPs.](https://sadservers.com/scenario/saskatoon)
* ["Santiago": Find the secret combination](https://sadservers.com/scenario/santiago)
* ["The Command Line Murders"](https://sadservers.com/scenario/command-line-murders)

Some rights reserved. Check the license terms
[here](https://github.com/livialima/linuxupskillchallenge/blob/master/LICENSE)

Commit message:

issue #50 - ubuntu minimal missing files/apps

docs/08.md, after:

# Day 8 - The infamous "grep" and other text processors

* [Lesson video](https://youtu.be/kG5JGJN5iTc)

## INTRO

Your server is now running two services: the *sshd* (Secure Shell Daemon) service that you use to login; and the Apache2 web server. Both of these services are generating logs as you and others access your server - and these are text files which we can analyse using some simple tools.

Plain text files are a key part of "the Unix way" and there are many small "tools" to allow you to easily edit, sort, search and otherwise manipulate them. Today we’ll use `grep`, `cat`, `more`, `less`, `cut`, `awk` and `tail` to slice and dice your logs.

The `grep` command is famous for being extremely powerful and handy, but also because its "nerdy" name is typical of Unix/Linux conventions.

## YOUR TASKS TODAY

* Dump out the complete contents of a file with `cat` like this: `cat /var/log/apache2/access.log`
* Use `less` to open the same file, like this: `less /var/log/apache2/access.log` - and move up and down through the file with your arrow keys, then use “q” to quit.
* Again using `less`, look at a file, but practice confidently moving around using  *gg*, *GG* and */*,  *n* and *N* (to go to the top of the file, bottom of the file, to search for something and to hop to the next "hit" or back to the previous one)
* View recent logins and `sudo` usage by viewing `/var/log/auth.log` with `less`
* Look at just the tail end of the file with `tail /var/log/apache2/access.log` (yes, there's also a `head` command!)
* Follow a log in real-time with: `tail -f /var/log/apache2/access.log`  (while accessing your server’s web page in a browser)
* You can take the output of one command and "pipe" it in as the input to another by using the `|` (pipe) symbol
* So, dump out a file with `cat`, but pipe that output to `grep` with a search term - like this: `cat /var/log/auth.log  | grep "authenticating"`
* Simplify this to: `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log`
* Piping allows you to narrow your search, e.g.  `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log | grep "root"`
* Use the `cut` command to select out most interesting portions of each line by specifying "-d" (delimiter) and "-f" (field) - like: `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log| grep "root"| cut -f 10- -d" "`   (field 10 onwards, where the delimiter between field is the " " character). This approach can be very useful in extracting useful information from log data.
* Use the `-v` option to invert the selection and find attempts to login with other users: `grep "authenticating" /var/log/auth.log| grep -v "root"| cut -f 10- -d" "`

The output of any command can be "redirected" to a file with the ">" operator. The command: `ls -ltr > listing.txt` wouldn't list the directory contents to your screen, but instead redirect into the file "listing.txt" (creating that file if it didn't exist, or overwriting the contents if it did).

## WHERE'S MY /VAR/LOG/AUTH.LOG?

If you didn't find the file `/var/log/auth.log` you're probably using a minimal version of Ubuntu (it can be your own local VM or a version in one of the VPS). That minimal image is, well... minimal. It only has the systemd journal available and it didn't come with the old syslog system by default.

But don't worry! To get that back, `sudo apt install rsyslog` and the file will be created. Just give it a few minutes to populate before working on the lesson.

It also be missing a few of the other programs we use in the challenge, but you can always install them.

## POSTING YOUR PROGRESS

Re-run the command to list all the IP's that have unsuccessfully tried to login to your server as *root* - but this time, use the the ">" operator to redirect it to the file: `~/attackers.txt`. You might like to share and compare with others doing the course how heavily you're "under attack"!

## EXTENSION

* See if you can extend your filtering of `auth.log` to select just the IP addresses, then pipe this to  `sort`, and then further to `uniq` to get a list of all those IP addresses that have been "auditing" your server security for you.
* Investigate the `awk` and `sed` commands. When you're having difficulty figuring out how to do something with `grep` and `cut`, then you may need to step up to using these. Googling for "linux sed tricks" or "awk one liners" will get you many examples.
* Aim to learn at least one simple useful trick with both `awk` and `sed`

## RESOURCES

* [Text processing commands](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nLa6jAbULe8&t=97s)
* [OSTechNix grep tutorial](https://www.ostechnix.com/the-grep-command-tutorial-with-examples-for-beginners/)
* [Where GREP came from](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NTfOnGZUZDk)
* [SED onliners](https://edoras.sdsu.edu/doc/sed-oneliners.html)
* [RegExr - a tool to learn, build and test Regular Expressions](https://regexr.com/)
* [explainshell.com - write down a command-line to see the help text that matches each argument](https://explainshell.com/)

## TROUBLESHOOT AND MAKE A SAD SERVER HAPPY!

Practice what you've learned with some challenges at [SadServers.com](https://sadservers.com/):

* ["Saskatoon": counting IPs.](https://sadservers.com/scenario/saskatoon)
* ["Santiago": Find the secret combination](https://sadservers.com/scenario/santiago)
* ["The Command Line Murders"](https://sadservers.com/scenario/command-line-murders)

Some rights reserved. Check the license terms
[here](https://github.com/livialima/linuxupskillchallenge/blob/master/LICENSE)
