---
comments: true
---

# Day 10 - Getting the computer to do your work for you

* [Complementary video](https://youtu.be/ktjabe8enxU)

## INTRO

Linux has a rich set of features for running scheduled tasks. One of the key
attributes of a good sysadmin is getting the computer to do your work for you
(sometimes misrepresented as laziness!) -  and a well configured set of
scheduled tasks is key to keeping your server running well.

The time-based job scheduler [cron(8)](https://linux.die.net/man/8/cron) is the
one most commonly used by Linux sysadmins. It's been around more or less in it's
current form since Unix System V and uses a standardized syntax that's in
widespread use.

### Using at to schedule oneshot tasks

If you're on Ubuntu, you will probably need to install the _at_ package first.
We'll use this command to schedule a one time task to be ran at some point in
the future.

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install at
```

Next, let's print the filename of the terminal connected to standard input (in
Linux everything is a file, including your terminal!). We're going to echo
something to our terminal at some point in the future, to see how _at_ works.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ tty
/dev/pts/0
```

Now we'll schedule a command to echo a greeting to our terminal 1 minute in the
future.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ echo 'echo "Greetings $USER!" > /dev/pts/0' | at now + 1 minutes
warning: commands will be executed using /bin/sh
job 2 at Sun May 26 06:30:00 2024
```

After several seconds, a greeting should be printed to our terminal.

```bash
...
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ Greetings vagrant!
```

It's not as common for this to be used to schedule one time tasks, but if you
ever needed to, now you have an idea of how this might work. In the next section
we'll learn about scheduling time-based tasks using cron and crontab.

_For a more in-depth exploration of scheduling things with `at` review the
relevant articles in the [further reading](#further-reading) section below._

### Using crontab to schedule jobs

In Linux we use the `crontab` command to interact with tasks scheduled with
the cron daemon. Each user, including the root user, can schedule jobs that run
as their user.

Display your user's crontab with `crontab -l`.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ crontab -l
no crontab for vagrant
```

Unless you've already created a crontab for your user, you probably won't have
one yet. Let's create a simple cronjob to understand how it works.

Using the `crontab -e` command, let's create our first cronjob. On Ubuntu, if
this is you're first time editing a crontab you will be greeted with a menu to
choose your preferred editor.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ crontab -e
no crontab for vagrant - using an empty one

Select an editor.  To change later, run 'select-editor'.
  1. /bin/nano        <---- easiest
  2. /usr/bin/vim.basic
  3. /usr/bin/vim.tiny
  4. /bin/ed

Choose 1-4 [1]: 2
```

Choose whatever your preferred editor is then press _Enter_.

At the bottom of the file add the following cronjob and then save and quit the
file.

```bash
* * * * * echo "Hello world!" > /dev/pts/0
```

> NOTE: Make sure that the `/dev/pts/0` file path matches whatever was printed
> by your `tty` command [above](#using-at-to-schedule-oneshot-tasks).

Next, let's take a look at the crontab we just installed by running `crontab -l`
again. You should see the cronjob you created printed to your terminal.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ crontab -l
# Edit this file to introduce tasks to be run by cron.
# 
# Each task to run has to be defined through a single line
# indicating with different fields when the task will be run
# and what command to run for the task
# 
# To define the time you can provide concrete values for
# minute (m), hour (h), day of month (dom), month (mon),
# and day of week (dow) or use '*' in these fields (for 'any').
# 
# Notice that tasks will be started based on the cron's system
# daemon's notion of time and timezones.
# 
# Output of the crontab jobs (including errors) is sent through
# email to the user the crontab file belongs to (unless redirected).
# 
# For example, you can run a backup of all your user accounts
# at 5 a.m every week with:
# 0 5 * * 1 tar -zcf /var/backups/home.tgz /home/
# 
# For more information see the manual pages of crontab(5) and cron(8)
# 
# m h  dom mon dow   command
* * * * * echo "Hello world!" > /dev/pts/0
```

This cronjob will print the string `Hello world!` to your terminal every minute until we remove or update the cronjob. Wait a few minutes and see what it does.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ Hello world!
Hello world!
Hello world!
...
```

When you're ready uninstall the crontab you created with `crontab -r`.

### Understanding crontab syntax

The basic crontab syntax is as follows:

```
* * * * * command to be executed
- - - - -
| | | | |
| | | | ----- Day of week (0 - 7) (Sunday=0 or 7)
| | | ------- Month (1 - 12)
| | --------- Day of month (1 - 31)
| ----------- Hour (0 - 23)
------------- Minute (0 - 59)
```

* Minute values can be from 0 to 59.
* Hour values can be from 0 to 23.
* Day of month values can be from 1 to 31.
* Month values can be from 1 to 12.
* Day of week values can be from 0 to 6, with 0 denoting Sunday.

There are different operators that can be used as a short-hand to specify multiple
values in each field:

| Symbol | Description                                                |
|--------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| *      | Wildcard, specifies every possible time interval           |
| ,      | List multiple values separated by a comma.                 |
| -      | Specify a range between two numbers, separated by a hyphen |
| /      | Specify a periodicity/frequency using a slash              |

There's also a helpful site to check cron schedule expressions at [crontab.guru](https://crontab.guru/).

_Use the crontab.guru site to play around with the different expressions to get
an idea of how it works or click the **random** button to generate an expression
at random._

## YOUR TASKS TODAY

1. Schedule daily backups of user's home directories
2. Schedule a task that looks for any backups that are more than 7 days old and
  deletes them

### Automating common system administration tasks

One common use-case that cronjobs are used for is scheduling backups of various
things. As the root user, we're going to create a cronjob that creates a
compressed archive of all of the user's home directories using the `tar` utility.
Tar is short for "tape archive" and harkens back to earlier days of Unix and
Linux when data was commonly archived on tape storage similar to cassette tapes.

As a general rule, it's good to test your command or script before installing it
as a cronjob. First we'll create a backup of `/home` by manually running a
version of our `tar` command.

```
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ sudo tar -czvf /var/backups/home.tar.gz /home/
tar: Removing leading `/' from member names
/home/
/home/ubuntu/
/home/ubuntu/.profile
/home/ubuntu/.bash_logout
/home/ubuntu/.bashrc
/home/ubuntu/.ssh/
/home/ubuntu/.ssh/authorized_keys
...
```

> NOTE: We're passing the `-v` verbose flag to `tar` so that we can see better
> what it's doing. `-czf` stand for "create", "gzip compress", and "file" in
> that order. See `man tar` for further details.

Let's also use the `date` command to allow us to insert the date of the backup
into the filename. Since we'll be taking daily backups, after this cronjob
has ran for a few days we will have a few days worth of backups each with it's
own archive _tagged_ with the date.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ date
Sun May 26 04:12:13 UTC 2024
```

The default string printed by the `date` command isn't that useful. Let's output
the date in ISO 8601 format, sometimes referred to as the "ISO date".

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ date -I
2024-05-26
```

This is a more useful string that we can combine with our `tar` command to
create an archive with today's date in it.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ sudo tar -czvf home.$(date -I).tar.gz /home/
tar: Removing leading `/' from member names
/home/
/home/ubuntu/
...
```

Let's look at the backups we've created to understand how this date command is
being inserted into our filename.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ ls -l /var/backups
total 16
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 8205 May 26 04:16 home.2024-05-26.tar.gz
-rw-r--r-- 1 root root 3873 May 26 04:07 home.tar.gz
```

> NOTE: These `.tar.gz` files are often called [tarballs](https://wiki.debian.org/TarBall)
> by sysadmins.

Create and edit a crontab for root with `sudo crontab -e` and add the following
cronjob.

```bash
0 5 * * * tar -zcf /var/backups/home.$(date -I).tar.gz /home/
```

This cronjob will run every day at 05:00. After a few days there will be several
backups of user's home directories in `/var/backups`.

If we were to let this cronjob run indefinitely, after a while we would end up
with a lot of backups in `/var/backups`. Over time this will cause the disk
space being used to grow and could fill our disk. It's probably best
that we don't let that happen. To mitigate this risk, we'll setup another
cronjob that runs everyday and cleans up old backups that we don't need to store.

The `find` command is like a swiss army knife for finding files based on all
kinds of criteria and listing them or doing other things to them, such as
deleting them. We're going to craft a `find` command that finds all of the
backups we created and deletes any that are older than 7 days.

First let's get an idea of how the `find` command works by finding all of our
backups and listing them.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ sudo find /var/backups -name "home.*.tar.gz"
/var/backups/home.2024-05-26.tar.gz
...
```

What this command is doing is looking for all of the files in `/var/backups`
that start with `home.` and end with `.tar.gz`. The `*` is a wildcard character
that matches any string.

In our case we need to create a scheduled task that will find all of the files
older than 7 days in `/var/backups` and delete them. Run `sudo crontab -e` and
install the following cronjob.

```
30 5 * * * find /var/backups -name "home.*.tar.gz" -mtime +7 -delete
```

> NOTE: The `-mtime` flag is short for "modified time" and in our case `find` is
> looking for files that were _modified_ more than 7 days ago, that's what the
> _+7_ indicates. The `find` command will be covered in greater detail on
> [Day 11 - Finding things...](11.md).

By now, our crontab should look something like this:

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ sudo crontab -l
# Daily user dirs backup
0 5 * * * tar -zcf /var/backups/home.$(date -I).tar.gz /home/
# Retain 7 days of homedir backups
30 5 * * * find /var/backups -name "home.*.tar.gz" -mtime +7 -delete
```

Setting up cronjobs using the `find ... -delete` syntax is fairly idiomatic of
scheduled tasks a system administrator might use to manage files and remove
old files that are no longer needed to prevent disks from getting full. It's not
uncommon to see more sophisticated _cron scripts_ that use a combination of tools
like `tar`, `find`, and `rsync` to manage backups incrementally or on a schedule
and implement a more sophisticated retention policy based on real-world use-cases.

## System crontab

There’s also a system-wide crontab defined in `/etc/crontab`. Here's an example, along with an explanation:

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ cat /etc/crontab
# /etc/crontab: system-wide crontab
# Unlike any other crontab you don't have to run the `crontab'
# command to install the new version when you edit this file
# and files in /etc/cron.d. These files also have username fields,
# that none of the other crontabs do.

SHELL=/bin/sh
# You can also override PATH, but by default, newer versions inherit it from the environment
#PATH=/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin

# Example of job definition:
# .---------------- minute (0 - 59)
# |  .------------- hour (0 - 23)
# |  |  .---------- day of month (1 - 31)
# |  |  |  .------- month (1 - 12) OR jan,feb,mar,apr ...
# |  |  |  |  .---- day of week (0 - 6) (Sunday=0 or 7) OR sun,mon,tue,wed,thu,fri,sat
# |  |  |  |  |
# *  *  *  *  * user-name command to be executed
17 *	* * *	root    cd / && run-parts --report /etc/cron.hourly
25 6	* * *	root	test -x /usr/sbin/anacron || ( cd / && run-parts --report /etc/cron.daily )
47 6	* * 7	root	test -x /usr/sbin/anacron || ( cd / && run-parts --report /etc/cron.weekly )
52 6	1 * *	root	test -x /usr/sbin/anacron || ( cd / && run-parts --report /etc/cron.monthly )
#
```

It's not common to use `/etc/crontab` anymore and instead user's are encouraged
to install their own crontab for their user, even for the root user. User
crontab's are all located in `/var/spool/cron`. The exact subdirectory tends to
vary depending on the distribution.

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ sudo ls -l /var/spool/cron/crontabs
total 8
-rw------- 1 root    crontab  392 May 26 04:45 root
-rw------- 1 vagrant crontab 1108 May 26 05:45 vagrant
```

Note that the system crontab shown above also manages cronjobs that run daily,
weekly, and monthly as scripts in `/etc/cron.*` directories. Let's look at
one example.

On your system type: `ls -l /etc/cron.daily` - you'll see something like this:

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ ls -l /etc/cron.daily
total 20
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root  376 Nov 11  2019 apport
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 1478 Apr  8  2022 apt-compat
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root  123 Dec  5  2021 dpkg
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root  377 Jan 24  2022 logrotate
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 1330 Mar 17  2022 man-db
```

Each of these files is a script or a shortcut to a script to do some regular
task, logrotate for example, and they're run in alphabetic order by `run-parts`.
So in this case _apport_ will run first. Use `less` or `cat` to view some of the
scripts on your system - many will look very complex and are best left well
alone, but others may be just a few lines of simple commands. For example:

```bash
vagrant@ubuntu2204:~$ cat /etc/cron.daily/dpkg 
#!/bin/sh

# Skip if systemd is running.
if [ -d /run/systemd/system ]; then
  exit 0
fi

/usr/libexec/dpkg/dpkg-db-backup
```

As an alternative to scheduling jobs with `crontab` you may also create a script
and put it into one of the `/etc/cron.{daily,weekly,monthly}` directories and
it will get ran at the desired interval.

## A note about systemd timers

All major Linux distributions now include "systemd". As well as starting and
stopping services, this can _also_ be used to run tasks at specific times via
"timers". See which ones are already configured on your server with:

```bash
systemctl list-timers
```

Use the links in the [further reading](#further-reading) section to read up about how these timers work.

# Further reading

* [freeCodeCamp: Job Scheduling in RHEL – cron and at Explained with Examples](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/job-scheduling-in-rhel/#:~:text=on%20your%20own.-,Job%20Scheduling%20using%20at,remember%20to%20do%20them%20later.)
* [nixCraft: How To Add Jobs To cron Under Linux or UNIX](https://www.cyberciti.biz/faq/how-do-i-add-jobs-to-cron-under-linux-or-unix-oses/)
* [Arabesque: Cron best practices](https://blog.sanctum.geek.nz/cron-best-practices/)
* [Linode: Using Cron to Schedule Tasks for Certain Times or Intervals](https://www.linode.com/docs/guides/schedule-tasks-with-cron/)
* [Arch Wiki: A good overview of systemd/Timers](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Systemd/Timers)
* [How to Use Systemd Timers as a Cron Replacement](https://www.maketecheasier.com/use-systemd-timers-as-cron-replacement/)

# License

Some rights reserved. Check the license terms
[here](https://github.com/livialima/linuxupskillchallenge/blob/master/LICENSE)
