---
comments: true
---
# Day 15 - Deeper into repositories...

* [Lesson video](https://youtu.be/DMenSNaMiD4)
* Complementary video: [Application repositories](https://www.youtube.com/live/5oGwnrd44BI?t=5275s)

## INTRO

Early on you installed some software packages to your server using `apt install`. That was fairly painless, and we explained how the Linux model of software installation is very similar to how "app stores" work on Android, iPhone, and increasingly in MacOS and Windows.

Today however, you'll be looking "under the covers" to see how this works; better understand the advantages (and disadvantages!) - and to see how you can safely extend the system beyond the main official sources.

## YOUR TASKS TODAY

* Add a new repo
* Remove a repo
* Find out where to get a program from (apt search)
* Install a program without apt

## REPOSITORIES AND VERSIONS

Any particular Linux installation has a number of important characteristics:

* Version - e.g. Ubuntu 20.04, CentOS 5, RHEL 6
* "Bit size"  - 32-bit or 64-bit
* Chip - Intel, AMD, PowerPC, ARM

The version number is particularly important because it controls the versions of application that you can install. When Ubuntu 18.04 was released (in April 2018 - hence the version number!), it came out with Apache 2.4.29. So, if your server runs 18.04, then even if you installed Apache with `apt` five years later that is still the version you would receive. This provides stability, but at an obvious cost for web designers who hanker after some feature which later versions provide. Security patches _are_ made to the repositories, but by "backporting" security fixes from later versions into the old stable version that was first shipped.

## WHERE IS ALL THIS SETUP?

We'll be discussing the "package manager" used by the Debian and Ubuntu distributions, and dozens of derivatives. This uses the `apt` command, but for most purposes the competing `yum` and `dnf` commands used by Red Hat family like RHEL, Fedora, RockyLinux, and CentOS will work in a very similar way - as do the equivalent utilities in other versions.

The configuration is done with files under the _/etc/apt_ directory, and to see where the packages you install are coming from, use `less` to view _/etc/apt/sources.list.d/ubuntu.sources_ where you'll see entries that specify repository URIs, suites, and components for your specific version:

```bash
     Types: deb
     URIs: http://archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/
     Suites: noble noble-updates noble-backports
     Components: main restricted universe multiverse
```
Debian and other Debian-based distributions still configure it directly on _/etc/apt/sources.list_ as one-liners but the parameters are the same:

* Type of package: `deb`
* URI (source): most commonly a web address to pull the packages from
* Suite: codename for the version of the distro, i.e., Ubuntu 24.04 is called Noble, 26.04 is Jammy, and so on.
* Components (the actual repo): what set of packages are you pulling from it, "main" or something extra

Example of an `sources.list` line, pulling `deb` packages from the `main` and `non-free-firmware` repositories for Debian 13 (trixie):

```bash
deb http://deb.debian.org/debian trixie main non-free-firmware
```

There's no need to be concerned with the exact syntax of this for now, but what’s fairly common is to want to add extra repositories - and this is what we'll deal with next.

## EXTRA REPOSITORIES

Main repositories contain the core, essential packages required for the operating system to function, including the kernel, basic utilities, and critical libraries. And while there's an amazing amount of software available in the those repositories, there are often packages not available because they are considered _non-essential_. They will typically be categorized in distinct repositories based on:

* Stability: when new packages are first introduced, an `unstable` repo can act as a rolling release stream, whereas the official support is focused more on `stable` repos like `main` - where the packages are well-tested for bugs and conflicts.
* Ideology: if the software can be offered under a free license ([free as in freedom, not free as in beer](https://www.debian.org/intro/free)) or not; proprietary apps and non-free firmware usually get pushed to separated repositories.

So, next you’ll adding an extra repository to your system, and install software from it.

## ENABLING EXTRA REPOSITORIES

First do a quick check to see how many packages you *could* already install. You can get the full list and details by running:

`apt-cache dump`

...but you'll want to press Ctrl-c a few times to stop that, as it's far too long-winded.

Instead, filter out just the packages names using `grep`, and count them using: `wc -l` (`wc` is "word count", and the "-l" makes it count lines rather than words) - like this:

`apt-cache dump | grep "Package:" | wc -l`

These are all the packages you could now install. Sometimes there are extra packages available if you enable extra repositories. Most Linux distros have a similar concept, but in Ubuntu, often the "Universe" and "Multiverse" repositories are disabled by default. These are hosted at Ubuntu, but with less support, and Multiverse: _"contains software which has been classified as non-free ...may not include security updates"_. Examples of useful tools in Multiverse might include the compression utilities `rar` and `lha`, and the network performance tool `netperf`.

To enable the "Multiverse" repository, you can follow the [ubuntu community guide](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories/CommandLine), but you will basically just _add a register for that repo_ in your apt source file.

After adding this, update your local cache of available applications:

`sudo apt update`

Once done, search the application you're looking for with `apt-cache search netperf`, for example, instead of manually running the dump list. You will see a smaller list with names of packages related and a brief one-line description.

Then just check `netperf` like this:

`apt-cache policy netperf`

...and the output will show that it's coming from Multiverse.

```bash
netperf:
  Installed: (none)
  Candidate: 2.7.0-0.1
  Version table:
     2.7.0-0.1 500
        500 http://mirrors.digitalocean.com/ubuntu noble/multiverse amd64 Packages
```

## ADDING OTHER REPOSITORIES

Software can still be provided in `deb` package format and not be available in any of the official sources, i.e., it doesn't come from Debian or Ubuntu servers. In those cases, two things are possible:

* Only the `deb` package is provided, and you have to install it manually with `dpkg` (see below)
* The developer company provided a repository source and its [GPG signature key](https://askubuntu.com/a/179237) so you can add a register like this:

```bash
Types: deb
URIs: https://brave-browser-apt-release.s3.brave.com
Suites: stable
Components: main
Architectures: amd64 arm64
Signed-By: /usr/share/keyrings/brave-browser-archive-keyring.gpg
```

Normally you will have instructions on how to download and verify the GPG signature (or just a script to do it for you). Again, use common sense and only download from respectable sources.

On another note, [PPAs](https://askubuntu.com/questions/4983/what-are-ppas-and-how-do-i-use-them) (Personal Package Archives) used to be an alternative way to get extra packages that didn't make into official repos but became obsolete after the adoption of modern app stores like Snap and Flatpak.

## APT AND DPKG

So you downloaded a `.deb` file and you want to install it. Can I use `apt` to handle it?

Well, [yes](https://unix.stackexchange.com/a/159114).

The `apt` (Advanced Package Tool) is a high-level package manager that resolves dependencies, while `dpkg` (Debian Package) is a low-level tool that directly handles `.deb` files.

So, you can manually install a `deb` package with either of those options:

```bash
dpkg -i /path/to/package/name.deb
apt install /path/to/package/name.deb
```

## PACKAGES OUTSIDE THE DEBIAN/UBUNTU ECOSYSTEM

But what if the application I want to use is not available for Debian/Ubuntu?

You still have a chance! Check if that app is available in **Snap** or **Flatpak**. Those formats are universal and cross-distribution, and each package has its dependencies self-contained. You will have to install Snap to be able to download from the [Snap Store](https://snapcraft.io/store) (centralized, developed by Canonical), or install Flatpak to pull packages from places like [FlatHub](https://flathub.org/) (decentralized, community-maintained ecosystem).

In any case, if the software you are installing is open source, you will most likely have the option to [install it from source](./17.md) as well.

DISCLAIMER: use a native package or build from source when you can. The self-contained apps from apps stores tend to generate performance and resource overhead.

## SUMMARY

Installing only from the default repositories is clearly the safest, but there are often good reasons for going beyond them. As a sysadmin you need to judge the risks, and evaluate if an application justify the use of different packaging managing solutions.

As a general rule:

* Have good reasons for hooking into more than one or two extra repositories; more is not necessarily better.
* Read up about a repository first, to understand any potential disadvantages.

## RESOURCES

* [What do you mean by Free Software?](http://www.debian.org/intro/free)
* [Package management with APT](https://help.ubuntu.com/community/AptGet/Howto)
* [How to use apt-cache](https://itsfoss.com/apt-cache-command/)
* [How to use dpkg](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/linux-unix/debian-software-package-managementdpkg-in-linux/)
* [Package management command comparison](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Pacman/Rosetta)
* [How to use snap](https://snapcraft.io/docs/tutorials/get-started/)
* [How to use flatpak](https://docs.flatpak.org/en/latest/using-flatpak.html)

Some rights reserved. Check the license terms
[here](https://github.com/livialima/linuxupskillchallenge/blob/master/LICENSE)
